26 Of course, musical signals are in some respects more complex than spoken sentences: listening to a 
Bach fugue is like listening to four people speak at the same time. But this should make us wonder why we 
tolerate higher information content in music.


theory
24
simply does not matter whether you follow all the details of a piece’s syntax; what mat-
ters is that you follow the piece well enough to enjoy what you hear. For in the end, 
the composer’s well-being depends on your willingness to listen, not on whether you 
interpret music in the same way that he or she does. Or to revert to our earlier anal-
ogy: what is important is not that you understand the magic trick, but simply that 
you feel the force of the illusion.
I should pause here to mention that I have a personal perspective on these 
issues, since I sometimes create music with the aid of algorithms and computers. 
In these cases I can be fairly removed from the underlying syntactical structure 
of the music I create, whether that be some complex melodic process, a gradually 
shifting probability distribution over the twelve chromatic notes, or a harmonic 
structure derived from a mathematical analysis of Mozart’s music. Here my com-
positional role is that of a gatekeeper or judge, selecting the computer-generated 
passages that strike me as intuitively compelling, and arranging them, in a collage-
like fashion, so as to produce the best musical effect. (Typically, I augment these 
algorithmic passages with music composed intuitively, producing a ﬁ nal prod-
uct that blends the human and the inhuman.) The fact that some people seem to 
like this music only serves to highlight the oddness of the linguistic approach. For 
here the composer is only vaguely aware of the structures that, on the linguistic 
model, the listener is supposed to be recovering. Given that I am not at all sure 
that I am hearing these structures accurately, it seems presumptuous for me to 
demand much more from my listeners. Instead, I am hoping that listeners will 
be directly affected by the music in the same way I am—that is, tickled, amused, 
impressed, or awed.
Faced with this situation, I draw several morals.
First, there is a potential for real divergence between what we might call “com-
poser’s grammar” and “listener’s grammar.” Listeners may potentially grasp only a 
fraction of the underlying syntax of a Bach fugue, a Beethoven symphony, or a John 
Coltrane solo. (Some authors have claimed that this is particularly true when we con-
sider the artiﬁ cial syntaxes of twentieth-century atonality, and this may be true; but 
the more important point is that there will be signiﬁ cant gaps whenever we consider 
music of any complexity.27) In this sense, listening is like trying to catch up to a train 
that is forever just beyond your reach; indeed, the very fact that we miss so much 
structure is no doubt part of what leads us to study scores, or listen repeatedly to 
the same pieces. This means that there are at least two separate projects that music 
theorists can engage in: modeling what composers actually do, and modeling what 
listeners actually experience. We should be careful not to conﬂ ate these by acting as if 
listening is “composing in reverse.”