2.5 refers to the pitch class Dμ, or D quarter-
tone sharp, halfway between D and Ef.


Harmony and Voice Leading
31
corresponds to the quality that is common to all the pitches sharing the same chroma: 
thus, the point “2” represents the quality (“D-ishness”) that is shared by the pitches 
D0, D1, D2, D3, and so on.3  Alternatively, we can take points on the circle to represent 
categories of notes all sharing the same chroma.
It is important to understand that pitch and pitch-class space are not separate 
and independent: pitch-class space is formed out of pitch space when we choose to 
ignore, or abstract away from, octave information.4 As a result, many properties of 
linear pitch space are transferred to circular pitch-class space. For example, it is not 
necessary to devise a new system of naming pitch classes, as we can simply use pitch 
names in the range 0 £ x < 12 to refer to the chromas they possess (Figure 2.2.1). The 
terms “above” and “below” also inherit their meaning from pitch space: the phrase 
“the pitch class a quarter tone above pitch class D” simply refers to the chroma pos-
sessed by any pitch a quarter tone above any pitch with chroma D. (Of course, since 
pitch-class space is circular, it is not meaningful to say that one pitch class is abso-
lutely above or below another; the pitch class E is both two semitones above D and 
ten semitones below it.) Finally, the distance between two pitch classes can be deﬁ ned 
as the shortest distance between any two pitches belonging to those pitch classes. 
Thus, when a musician says “pitch class E is four semitones away from C,” this means 
that for every pitch with chroma C, the nearest pitch with chroma E is precisely four 
semitones away.
Ultimately, pitch classes are important because they provide a language for making 
generalizations about pitches. The statement “pitch class E is four semitones above C” 
implies the statements “E4 is four semitones above C4,” “E5 is four semitones above 
C5,” and so on. Since it would take too long to list these statements individually, musi-
cians instead use the convenient shorthand that pitch classes provide. Readers may 
ﬁ nd it useful here to consider the analogy between pitch class and time of day. The 
question “what’s the distance from C to Cs?” is exactly analogous to “how long is it 
from 8 am to 9 am?” The answer “there is one hour between 8 am and 9 am,” means 
that on any given day, 9 am occurs precisely one hour after 8 am. (Similarly, we can 
say “9 am is one hour after 8 am” or even “9 am is 23 hours before 8 am,” much as 
we might observe that pitch class A is both one semitone above and eleven semitones 
below Gs.) Here we use time of day to summarize inﬁ nitely many facts about times: 
the statement “there is one hour between 8 am and 9 am” implies that there is one