Chapter 6 proposes that there is an “extended common practice” stretching from the 
beginning of Western counterpoint to the tonal music of the twentieth century. What 
links these different styles is the combination of harmonic consistency and conjunct 
melodic motion: the idea that music should have a two-dimensional coherence, both 
harmonic (or vertical) and melodic (or horizontal). Chapter 7 uses geometrical mod-
els to investigate the functional harmony of the classical period, brieﬂ y considering 
the relation between traditional harmonic theory and the views of Heinrich Schen-
ker. Chapter 8 explores the ways in which nineteenth-century composers exploited 
efﬁ cient voice leading in chromatic space, suggesting that there is more structure 
to chromatic music than we might expect. Chapter 9 argues that twentieth-century 
tonal composers used scales to counteract the trend toward a saturated chromaticism, 
fusing chromatic voice-leading techniques with the limited macroharmony of earlier 
periods. Finally, Chapter 10 treats what I call the “modern jazz synthesis,” a contem-
porary common practice that unites impressionist chords and scales, chromatic voice 
leading, and the functional harmony of the classical era.
The design of the book means that readers will need to absorb a considerable 
amount of theoretical material before reaching the analytical payoff in the second 
half. Readers who are less interested in theory for its own sake may therefore want 
to read the book out of order. Chapter 8 can largely be read directly after Chapters 2 
and 3, although the discussion of Tristan will be enhanced by familiarity with the 
material in §§4.8–10. Chapter 9 can be read directly after Chapter 4. This abbreviated 
path hits the main theoretical highlights (new tools for understanding voice leading 
and scales), as well as the most important analytical applications: to the chromatic 
tonality of Schubert, Chopin and Wagner, and to the twentieth-century scale-based 
tonality of Debussy, Stravinsky and Reich. When using the book in an advanced 
undergraduate theory class, I have assigned pieces from Chapters 8–9 as homework 
assignments early in the semester, while students are still reading the introductory 
chapters. (For instance, I assign Chopin’s E minor prelude and F minor mazurka in 
the week when students are reading Chapter 3.) That way, students have an oppor-
tunity to work with the music on their own before being introduced to my own par-
ticular perspective on these remarkable works.
Finally, a word of encouragement: it is possible to understand the gist of later chap-
ters even while remaining somewhat fuzzy about the technical material in Chapters 2–4.  
So don’t be afraid to forge ahead, returning to earlier sections as the need arises.