25
Second, we should be careful not to assume that there is any one thing that “listen-
ing” is. It is possible that some listeners are adept at recovering a large amount of the 
structure in muscial pieces, but many listeners are not. The heterogeneity of musical 
abilities makes it difﬁ cult to abstract away from individual variation in favor of some 
idealized “competent” listener. Can we describe as “competent” the listener who loves 
Beethoven, but who performs poorly on standard ear-training tests? What about the 
listener who hates music but perceives it very accurately? Does the “ideal” musical 
listener have absolute pitch? A perfect memory for every musical detail? Is the point of 
listening to music to experience aesthetic enjoyment, or is it to recover a kind of musi-
cal “syntax” that the composer placed in his or her music? Personally, I suspect there is 
no uncontroversial answer to these questions: there simply is no “competent” or “ideal” 
listener that is analogous to the “idealized speaker” of contemporary linguistics.
Third, listeners’ perceptions may in some respects be more crude and statisti-
cal than we would initially think. We do not determine the meaning of sentences 
by estimating the proportion of nouns to verbs, but we do respond very strongly to 
relatively crude global features of the musical stimulus. Does the piece use consonant 
or dissonant harmonies? Does it restrict itself, over moderate spans of musical time, 
to a small set of notes, and do these notes themselves change over larger time spans? 
Do melodies in general move by short distances? The answers to these questions tell 
us an enormous amount about how untrained listeners will respond to a piece. Hence 
my ﬁ ve features might be compared to a set of basic tools which composers can use 
to perform their musical magic.
Fourth, musical heterogeneity poses special problems for composers, who con-
front an audience of widely varying interests and abilities. Traditional tonal compos-
ers dealt with this by writing music that was immediately attractive, largely by virtue 
of exploiting the ﬁ ve features. Many composers also built into their music layers of 
additional, more complicated structure—complex thematic and formal interrela-
tionships, intricate rhythmic devices, sophisticated contrapuntal tricks, and so on. 
The result was a kind of music that listeners could engage with in multiple ways: 
laypersons could simply enjoy a piece for the gross statistical features it shared with 
many other compositions in the same style, while cognoscenti could become more 
involved in the subtleties particular to that work.
I ﬁ nd it fascinating that so many twentieth-century musicians chose to aban-
don this strategy. Composers such as Schoenberg, Webern, Berg, and Varèse—and 
later Babbitt, Boulez, Cage, Xenakis, and Stockhausen—wrote music that listen-
ers often found quite unpleasant. In many cases, this was because these compos-
ers rejected not just acoustic consonance, but also harmonic consistency, conjunct 
melodic motion, limited macroharmony, and centricity. Some early modernist com-
posers may have hoped that ordinary listeners would adapt to this new musical style, 
adjusting their ears to the absence of familiar musical structures and coming to enjoy 
atonality as deeply and directly as traditional music. But after several decades of 
avant-garde exploration, composers began to realize that this might never occur. The 
locus classicus of this new perspective is Milton Babbitt’s 1958 manifesto “Who Cares 
if You Listen?”—in which he cheerfully acknowledged that his music was not enjoyed 


theory
26
by laypersons, but only by a specialist musical community analogous to the specialist 
community of professional mathematicians.28
Rather than criticizing this point of view, let me just say that I am interested 
in music that does not make this choice: I like music that brings people together, 
rather than dividing them, and I think the traditional strategy—writing immediately 
attractive music that also contains deeper levels of structure—is as potent as it ever 
was. (Indeed, it may be all the more necessary in an economic and cultural environ-
ment in which notated music is somewhat marginal.) In this book, therefore, I will 
be primarily concerned with effects that can be achieved within a broadly attrac-
tive sound-world. From a technical standpoint, this restriction is relatively uncon-
straining, as a large number of avant-garde techniques are easily applied within a 
 consonant  harmonic context: it is perfectly possible, for example, to write music that 
is diatonic, or more generally macroharmonically consonant, while also being serial, 
aleatoric, indeterminate, wildly polyrhythmic, and so on.29 Thus, the choice between 
superﬁ cial accessibility and off-putting dissonance is not forced on us by our interest 
in particular musical techniques. Instead, it is a relatively independent reﬂ ection of 
our own aesthetic preferences.