24 Cook 1987, Marvin and Brinkman 1999.


Five Components of Tonality
23
sort of appreciation, and, at worst too intellectually engaged to enjoy the music as 
deeply as they might.
One might contrast this approach with an alternative, on which the composer’s 
and listener’s perspectives are thought to be more closely aligned. Here the relevant 
analogy is not to magic, but to language: the idea is that composers write music that 
contains various sorts of patterns, including familiar sequences of chords and keys, 
thematic recurrences, and so on, while the listener’s job is to recover these patterns. 
Expert listeners recover more patterns than inexpert listeners, and are consequently 
more qualiﬁ ed to pass aesthetic judgment on particular pieces of music. Insofar as 
some composers place patterns in their music that cannot be decoded aurally by 
expert listeners, their compositions are thereby aesthetically ﬂ awed.25 On this view, 
music essentially involves a language-like transmission of syntactic patterns from 
producer to receiver.
The linguistic model is attractive, and there is no doubt some truth to it. But I 
think it understates the extraordinary distinctiveness of human language. Linguistic 
abilities are remarkable both for their accuracy and for their homogeneity: if you say 
“there is a tiger nearby,” I have no trouble repeating the sentence word for word, writ-
ing it down, or explaining what it means. Furthermore, almost any English speaker 
can effortlessly distinguish grammatical utterances such as “there is a tiger nearby” 
from nongrammatical ones like “nearby tiger is.” By contrast, musical abilities are 
both heterogeneous and fairly inaccurate. First, there is an enormous spectrum rang-
ing from congenital amusics to gifted listeners with extraordinarily accurate abso-
lute pitch. These individuals have radically different musical capabilities as both 
producers and consumers of music. Second, while competent language-listeners 
are typically also competent language-speakers, this is not the case for music: most 
people enjoy listening to music, while only a few enjoy creating it. Third, even expert 
listeners lose a large amount of the “signal” in even moderately complicated music. 
I have had more than three decades of musical training, and yet I—like most other 
“expert” listeners—would have trouble notating, or recreating at the piano, the notes 
and rhythms in a ten-second excerpt from an unfamiliar four-voice Baroque fugue. 
Musically, in other words, I am analogous to a person who cannot reliably under-
stand all the words in the sentence “there is a tiger nearby.”26
These differences no doubt reﬂ ect the fact that music largely lacks semantic con-
tent. A listener who does not understand “be quiet, there’s a tiger nearby” is a serious 
danger to himself and others; consequently, there is tremendous pressure for speak-
ers and listeners to converge on the same interpretation of sentences. By contrast, a 
listener who does not follow the detailed syntax of a Beethoven symphony, but who 
nevertheless enjoys it, creates no problems whatsoever. In some important sense it