1.1 
DEFINITION: Let S and S' be families of objects. The Cartesian product
S x S' is the family of all ordered pairs (s, s') such that s is a member of S and s'
is a member of S'.
1.2.1 DEFINITION: A function or mapping from S into S' is a subfamily f of
S x S' which has this property:
Given any s in S, there is exactly one pair (s, s') within the family f which
has the given s as the first entry of the pair.
We say that s', in this situation, is the value of the function f for the
argument s; we shall write f (s) = s'.
If we think of fas a table, listing members of S (arguments) in a column on
the left and corresponding members of S' (values) in a column on the right,
then the defining property for functionhood stipulates that each member of S
appear once and only once in the left-hand column. (Some members of S' may
appear more than once in the right-hand column. Some members of S' may
not appear at all in the right-hand column.) 
1


1.2.2 
Mathematical Preliminaries
1.2.2 DEFINITION: Given families S and S', we shall say that the functions f
and g from S into S' are the same, writing f = g, if f and g are the same subsets
of S x S', that is if they produce the same table.
This special definition of functional equality is worth stressing. We shall
soon see why.
1.2.3 
DEFINITION: Let f be a function from S into S', and let f' be a function
from S' into S". Then the composition function f'f is defined from S into S" as
follows: Given an argument s in S, the value (f'f)(s) is f'(f(s)).
1.2.4 Let me draw special attention to the orthographic convention whereby
f' appears to the left of fin the notation for the composition function f'f. That
convention follows logically from another orthographic convention, the con-
vention of writing the function name to the left of the argument in the
expression "f (s)." The reader is no doubt used to this convention. One can
read "f (s)" as "the resulting value, when function f is applied to argument s."
Then "f'f(s)" is "the result when f is applied to the result of applying f to s."
These conventions will be called left (functional) orthography.
Right functional orthography is preferred by some mathematicians for
all contexts and by most mathematicians for some contexts. In right or-
thography, one writes "sf" or "(s)f" for "the operand s, transformed by the
function f." This value is what was written "f(s)" in left orthography. The
composition function which we called "f'f" in left orthography is called "ff "
in right orthography, so as to be consistent: "(s)ff'" in right orthography is
"s-transformed-by-f, all transformed by f'." This is what was notated "f f (s)"
in left orthography.
In the following work we shall use left orthography almost exclusively.
We shall use right orthography only once, when its intuitive pertinence seems
overwhelming. At that point in the text, the reader will be reminded of this
discussion. Right orthography would abstractly be more suitable for our
eventual purposes, but the reader's presumed familiarity with left or-
thography seemed decisive to me in making my choice.
1.2.5 Suppose that ft and f2 are functions from S to S'; suppose that f{ and f'2
are functions from S' to S"; suppose that f" is a function from S to S". We can
consider the truth or falsity of functional equations like f^ = f", fift = f2f2,
and so on. Our discussion of "functional equality" in 1.2.2 tells us how to
understand these equations, in evaluating their truth or falsity. The first
equation above asserts, "for any sample s, the result of applying f[ to ^(s) is
the same as the result of applying f" to the given s." The second equation
above asserts, "for any sample s, applying f{ to f^ (s) yields the same result as
applying f2 to f2(s)."