1.4 Now we begin the abstract study. We fix a family (i.e. collection) X of
abstract objects x, y, z,..., and develop abstract algebraic systems that model
the behavior of transformational algebra. First we must specify how the
objects of X are to "compose" one with another.
1.4.1 
DEFINITION: A binary composition on X is a function BIN that maps
X x X into X. We write BIN(x, y) for the value of BIN on the pair (x, y).
1.4.2 DEFINITION: A binary composition on X is associative if BIN(x,
BIN(y, z)) = BIN(BIN(x, y), z) for all x, y, and z.
A familiar non-associative binary composition on the natural numbers
is exponentiation: BIN(x, y) = x-to-the-y-power. For example BIN(3,
BIN (2,3)) = 3-to-the-(2-cubed)-power, or 3-to-the-eighth-power, while
BIN(BIN(3,2), 3) = (3-squared)-to-the-third-power, or 9-cubed. Nine-cubed
is 3-to-the-sixth, not 3-to-the-eighth.
1.4.3 
DEFINITION: A semigroup is an ordered pair (X, BIN) comprising a
family X and an associative binary composition BIN on X.
It is traditional to write the binary composition for a semigroup using
multiplicative notation when there is no reason to use some specific other
notation. Thus we shall generally write "xy" to signify BIN(x, y) in a semi-
group, failing some reason to write "x + y" or "x * y" and the like. The
Associative Law for BIN then reads "x(yz) = (xy)z." This notational conven-
tion simplifies the look of the page. It is important, though, not to carry over
into our general study intuitions about numerical multiplication which may
not be valid within a specific semigroup at hand.
It is also important to remember that in order to define a particular
semigroup, we must specify not only the family X of elements but also the
composition BIN under which the elements combine. Despite this, it is cus-
tomary to refer (improperly) to "the semigroup X" when the binary compo-
sition is clearly understood in a given context.
1.5.1 
DEFINITION: A left identity for a semigroup is an element 1 such that for
every x, Ix = x. A right identity is defined dually: For every x, xr = x. An
identity is an element e which is both a left identity and a right identity. 
5


7.5.2 
Mathematical Preliminaries
1.5.2 
THEOREM: If a semigroup has both a left identity 1 and a right identity r,
then 1 and r must be equal. Hence there can be at most one identity for a
semigroup. If a semigroup has one, we can therefore speak of "the" identity
element.
Proof: lr must equal r since 1 is a left identity. Ir must also equal 1 since r is
a right identity.
There are, incidentally, semigroups that have an infinite number of left
identities. (By the theorem above, a semigroup that has more than one left
identity cannot have any right identities.) There are, in fact, both finite and
infinite semigroups in which every element is a left identity. To illustrate this,
take any family X and define on X the composition BIN(x, y) = y for all x and
all y; (X, BIN) is such a semigroup.
1.6.1 
DEFINITION: Given a semigroup with identity e; given an element x, a
left inverse for x is an element 1 satisfying Ix = e. A right inverse for x is an
element r satisfying xr = e. An inverse for x is an x' which is both a left inverse
and a right inverse.
1.6.2 
THEOREM: If an element x of a semigroup with identity has both a left
inverse 1 and a right inverse r, then 1 = r. Hence x can have at most one inverse.
If x has one, we can therefore call it "the" inverse of x.
Proof: 1 = le = l(xr) = (lx)r = er = r.
1.6.3 In multiplicative notation for a semigroup with identity, the inverse of
an element x that has one is denoted x"1.