chapter 5 even farther. The basic construction is now the Injection Function:
Given a space S, finite subsets X and Y of S, and a transformation f mapping S
into itself, INJ(X, Y) (f) counts how many members of X are mapped by f into
members of Y. This number is meaningful even when S does not have a GIS
structure, and even when the transformation f js not so well behaved as are
xxx


Introduction
transpositions, inversions, and the like. Passages from Schoenberg and from
Babbitt are studied by way of illustration.
Instead of starting with a GIS and deriving certain characteristic trans-
formations therefrom, it is possible to start with a family of characteristic
transformations on a musical space and derive a GIS structure therefrom.
That is, instead of regarding the i-arrow on figure 0.1 as a measurement of
extension between points s and t observed passively "out there" in a Cartesian
res extensa, one can regard the situation actively, like a singer, player, or
composer, thinking: "I am at s; what characteristic transformation do I
perform in order to arrive at t?" Chapter 7 explores this conceptual inter-
relation between interval-as-extension and transposition-as-characteristic-
motion-through-space. After developing the mathematics that shows a logical
equivalence between GIS structures and certain structures of transformations
on spaces, the work proceeds by example. Passages from Schoenberg, Wag-
ner, Brahms, and Beethoven indicate how suggestive it can be to consider
networks of "intervals" and networks of "transpositions" (modulations, and
so forth) as various aspects of the same basic phenomenon.
The morphology of such networks can be carried over to that of networks
involving other sorts of transformations. Chapter 8 studies networks involv-
ing transformations of Klangs in the sense of Riemann, networks involving
serial transformations of various sorts, and networks involving inversional
transformations. The Beethoven example from chapter 7 is reconsidered, and
there are further examples from Wagner, Webern, and Bach.